[refman] add remarks disambiguating the two notions of class (#16682)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/addendum/type-classes.rst

Typeclasses
===========

> This chapter presents a quick reference of the commands related to typeclasses.
> For an actual introduction to typeclasses, there is a description of the system
> :cite:`sozeau08` and the literature on type classes in Haskell which also
> applies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter describes the commands related to typeclasses.
Typeclasses are described in more detail in :cite:`sozeau08`.
The Haskell type class literature is also relevant.
```

"This chapter ..." is very weak.  It would be better to start with a sentence describing the benefit to the user, if you're willing.

relevent -> helpful?

Author: Yes, what should we write instead.

facilities for dealing with obligations.

> Binding Typeclasses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Binding typeclasses
```

Generally we've been capitalizing only the first word of section titles.  Maybe we'll change that at some point, but consistency is a good idea.  (comment applies in multiple places)

Author: I couldn't remember if we used title case in titles or not, I'll change them back.

      { le : A -> A -> bool }.

This declaration means that any instance of the ``Ord`` typeclass must have an
instance of ``EqDec``. The parameters of the subclass contain at least all the
parameters of its superclasses in their order of appearance (here A is the only
one). As we have seen, ``Ord`` is encoded as a record type with two parameters:
a type ``A`` and an ``E`` of type ``EqDec A``. However, one can still use it as

> if it had a single parameter inside generalizing binders: the generalization of

Reviewer: Would be better only to change the first line here and not reformat the rest of the paragraph.  That way I don't have to mentally diff the old and the new to find what's been changed.

Author: Yes that is true, but I also really don't like having inconsistent wrapping. If I don't change it now, who will change it?

Author: One upside is that when we edit this doc in the future you won't have to complain about the wrapping changes.

Reviewer: Can you reverse the wrapping?  It obscures the git history.  I don't rewrap lines I haven't changed.  Same thing for reformatting source code--not recommended.

superclasses will be done automatically.

.. coqtop:: all

   Definition le_eqb `{Ord A} (x y : A) := andb (le x y) (le y x).

> In some cases, to be able to specify sharing of structures, one may want to give
> explicitly the superclasses. It is is possible to do it directly in regular
> binders, and using the ``!`` modifier in typeclass binders. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To specify sharing of structures, you may want to explicitly specify
the superclasses. You can do this directly in regular
binders, and with the ``!`` modifier in typeclass binders. For example:
```

.. index:: :> (substructure)

> Substructures are components of a typeclass which are instances of a typeclass
> themselves. They often arise when using typeclasses for logical properties, e.g.:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Substructures are components of a typeclass which are themselves instances of a typeclass.
They often arise when using typeclasses for logical properties, e.g.:
```

declares each projection as an instance.

One can also declare existing objects or structure projections using
the :cmd:`Existing Instance` command to achieve the same effect.

Command summary
---------------

.. cmd:: Class @record_definition
         Class @ident_decl {* @binder } {? : @sort } := @constructor

>    The first form declares a record and makes the record a typeclass with

Reviewer: Would you revert this one paragraph too?  No wording change.

>    parameters :n:`{* @binder }` and the listed record fields.

Reviewer: I missed undoing this change.

   :attr:`universes(polymorphic)`, :attr:`universes(template)`,
   :attr:`universes(cumulative)` and :attr:`private(matching)` attributes.

   .. note::

>       Not to be confused with the notion of "coercion class" from
>       `implicit coercions<classes-implicit-coercions>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Don't confuse typeclasses with "coercion classes", described in
      `implicit coercions<classes-implicit-coercions>`.
```

   When record syntax is used, this command also supports the
   :attr:`projections(primitive)` :term:`attribute`.

   .. cmd:: Existing Class @qualid

>       This variant declares a typeclass from a previously declared
>       :term:`constant` or inductive definition. No methods or instances are
>       defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Declares a typeclass from a previously declared
      :term:`constant` or inductive definition. No methods or instances are
      defined.
```

   :attr:`universes(polymorphic)`, :attr:`universes(template)`,
   :attr:`universes(cumulative)` and :attr:`private(matching)` attributes.

   .. remark::
      Not to be confused with the notion of "class" from
      `implicit coercions<classes-implicit-coercions>`.

> 

Reviewer: For more clarity/less confusion, I would look at rewording the chapter to use "typeclass" everywhere instead of "class".  Are you up for it?

It still makes sense to have the note, but as a parenthetical comment right after the definition of "typeclass".  (It still a good idea to distinguish "typeclass" from "class".  If people routinely say "class" when they mean "typeclass", that's worth mentioning in the doc.

Author: That idea is good in theory, though I worry about the vernac syntax `Class` which means typeclass.

Reviewer: You could add a parenthetical comment in the description of the `Class` command.  The first sentence of that description already mentions typeclasses.

BTW, I see `Print TypeClasses` uses camel case while elsewhere it's `typeclasses` or `Typeclasses`.  You think that's worth changing?

Reviewer 2: > BTW, I see `Print TypeClasses` uses camel case while elsewhere it's `typeclasses` or `Typeclasses`. You think that's worth changing?

Yes

   .. warn:: A coercion will be introduced instead of an instance in future versions when using ':>' in 'Class' declarations. Replace ':>' with '::' (or use '#[global] Existing Instance field.' for compatibility with Coq < 8.17).

>       In future versions, :g:`:>` will declare a :ref:`coercion<coercions>`, as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      In future versions, :g:`:>` in the :n:`@record_definition` or :n:`@constructor` will declare a :ref:`coercion<coercions>`, as
```

      it does for other :cmd:`Record` commands. To eliminate the warning, use
      :g:`::` instead.

   .. warn:: Ignored instance declaration for “@ident”: “@term” is not a class

>       Using the ``::`` (or deprecated ``:>``) syntax with a right-hand-side that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Using the ``::`` (or deprecated ``:>``) syntax in the :n:`@record_definition`
      or :n:`@constructor` with a right-hand-side that
```

      is not itself a Class has no effect (apart from emitting this warning).

.. cmd:: Instance {? @ident_decl {* @binder } } : @type {? @hint_info } {? {| := %{ {* @field_val } %} | := @term } }

   Declares a typeclass instance named :token:`ident_decl` of the typeclass
   :n:`@type` with the specified parameters and with fields defined by
   :token:`field_val`, where each field must be a declared field of the
   typeclass.

   Adds one or more :token:`binder`\s to declare a parameterized instance.

>    :token:`hint_info` may be used to specify the hint priority, where 0 is the
>    highest priority as for :tacn:`auto` hints. If the priority is not specified,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :token:`hint_info` may be used to specify the hint priority. If the priority is not specified,
```

The wording that I removed should appear where `hint_info` is defined.  Doesn't seem necessary to say that here.

Reviewer: IMO If it's specific to this command, it goes here.  If it's a general fact about hints, it should be in the general hints documentation.  Repeating it here doesn't seem necessary.  A few things are worth repeating, but stating the same facts in multiple places can easily lead to them becoming inconsistent.

Author: OK seems that there is no documentation (that I could find) about hint priorities. I am inclined to leave this here, and make a note of the change for another PR.

.. cmd:: Instance {? @ident_decl {* @binder } } : @type {? @hint_info } {? {| := %{ {* @field_val } %} | := @term } }

>    Declares a typeclass instance named :token:`ident_decl` of the typeclass
>    :n:`@type` with the specified parameters and with fields defined by
>    :token:`field_val`, where each field must be a declared field of the
>    typeclass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Declares the typeclass instance :token:`ident_decl` of the type
   :n:`@type` with the specified parameters and with fields defined by
   :token:`field_val`, where each field must be a declared field of the
   typeclass.
```

typeclass instance is different from a typeclass?

"where each field must be a declared field of the typeclass." - or of the type?

Author: Yes, the terminology borrows from OOP (think Java) where you have "Classes" and "Instances" of those classes.

Author: I will keep a as a class may have many instances.

      deprecated. We recommend using :attr:`export` where possible. This warning
      is treated as an error by default.

   Like :cmd:`Definition`, it also supports the :attr:`program` attribute to
   switch the type checking to `Program` (chapter :ref:`programs`) and to use

>    the obligation mechanism to manage missing fields.

Reviewer: no wording change, omit

   .. cmd:: Declare Instance @ident_decl {* @binder } : @term {? @hint_info }

      In a :cmd:`Module Type`, declares that a corresponding concrete instance
      should exist in any implementation of this :cmd:`Module Type`. This is
      similar to the distinction between :cmd:`Parameter` vs. :cmd:`Definition`,

>       or between :cmd:`Declare Module` and :cmd:`Module`.

Reviewer: no wording change, omit

     between subgoals to avoid backtracking on subgoals that are entirely
     independent.

   + The transparency information of databases is used consistently for all
     hints declared in them. It is always used when calling the unifier. When
     considering local hypotheses, we use the transparent state of the first
     hint database given. Using an empty database (created with :cmd:`Create
     HintDb` for example) with unfoldable variables and :term:`constants

>      <constant>` as the first argument of ``typeclasses eauto`` hence makes

Reviewer: AFICT no change other than reformatting, please omit.

   .. _TypeclassesEautoBestEffort:

   :n:`best_effort`
     If the `best_effort` option is given and resolution fails, `typeclasses
     eauto` returns the first partial solution in which all remaining subgoals
     fall into one of these categories:

     - Stuck goals: the head of the goal has at least one associated declared
       mode and the constraint does not match any mode declared for its head.
       These goals are shelved.

     - Mode failures: the head of the constraint has at least one matching
       declared mode, but the constraint couldn't be solved. These goals are
       left as subgoals of :n:`typeclasses eauto best_effort`.

     During type inference, typeclass resolution always uses the `best_effort`
     option: in case of failure, it constructs a partial solution for the goals
     and gives a more informative error message. It can be used the same way in
     interactive proofs to check which instances/hints are missing for a

>      typeclass resolution to succeed.

Reviewer: AFAICT no real change, only formatting.  Please omit.

   :n:`@nat_or_var`
     Specifies the maximum depth of the search.

      .. warning::
         The semantics for the limit :n:`@nat_or_var`
         are different than for :tacn:`auto`. By default, if no limit is given,
         the search is unbounded. Unlike :tacn:`auto`, introduction steps count
         against the limit, which might result in larger limits being necessary

>          when searching with :tacn:`typeclasses eauto` than with :tacn:`auto`.

Reviewer: Again, no real change

     remain after resolution ends (following the behavior of Coq 8.5).

     .. note::
        ``all:once (typeclasses eauto)`` faithfully mimics what happens during
        typeclass resolution when it is called during refinement/type inference,
        except that *only* declared typeclass subgoals are considered at the
        start of resolution during type inference, while ``all`` can select
        non-typeclass subgoals as well. It might move to
        ``all:typeclasses eauto`` in future versions when the refinement engine

>         will be able to backtrack.

Reviewer: no real change except on line 508

.. tacn:: autoapply @one_term with @ident

   The tactic ``autoapply`` applies :token:`one_term` using the transparency
   information of the hint database :token:`ident`, and does *no* typeclass
   resolution. This can be used in :cmd:`Hint Extern`’s for typeclass instances
   (in the hint database ``typeclass_instances``) to allow backtracking on the
   typeclass subgoals created by the lemma application, rather than doing

>    typeclass resolution locally at the hint application time.

Reviewer: no real change

.. flag:: Typeclasses Strict Resolution

   Typeclass declarations introduced when this :term:`flag` is set have a
   stricter resolution behavior (the flag is off by default). When looking for
   unifications of a goal with an instance of this typeclass, we “freeze” all
   the existentials appearing in the goals, meaning that they are considered

>    rigid during unification and cannot be instantiated.

Reviewer: only change is on 617

.. flag:: Typeclasses Unique Solutions

   When a typeclass resolution is launched we ensure that it has a single
   solution or fail. This :term:`flag` ensures that the resolution is canonical,

>    but can make proof search much more expensive.

Reviewer: no real change

   to the typeclass goal of this typeclass is found, we never backtrack on it,
   assuming that it is canonical.

.. flag:: Typeclasses Iterative Deepening

   When this :term:`flag` is set, the proof search strategy is breadth-first
   search. Otherwise, the search strategy is depth-first search.  The default is
   off. :cmd:`Typeclasses eauto` is another way to set this flag.

.. opt:: Typeclasses Depth @natural

   This :term:`option` sets the maximum proof search depth.  The default is
   unbounded. :cmd:`Typeclasses eauto` is another way to set this option.

.. flag:: Typeclasses Debug

   Controls whether typeclass resolution steps are shown during search.  Setting
   this :term:`flag` also sets :opt:`Typeclasses Debug Verbosity` to 1.
   :cmd:`Typeclasses eauto` is another way to set this flag.

.. opt:: Typeclasses Debug Verbosity @natural

   Determines how much information is shown for typeclass resolution steps
   during search. 1 is the default level.  2 shows additional information such
   as tried tactics and shelving of goals.  Setting this :term:`option` to 1 or
   2 turns on the :flag:`Typeclasses Debug` flag; setting this option to 0 turns

>    that flag off.

Reviewer: no real changes here, either
